Add Unsafe Fail Forward Upgrades document (#235)
operator-framework/olm-docs: content/en/docs/advanced-tasks/fail-forward-upgrades.md

---

> title: "Fail forward upgrades"

Reviewer: How do we feel about "Enabling fail forward upgrades"?

Reviewer: Hmm - looking at the phrasing for the rest of the advanced-tasks changing this phrases would make it less consistent.

Author: What about "Opting into fail forward upgrades"? That would remain consistent with the other documents + this one.

Author: It probably also makes sense to either remove the description or update it to not be the same as the title 🤣

linkTitle: "Fail forward upgrades"
weight: 4
description: >
    Fail forward upgrades
---

## What "Fail Forward" upgrades add
A failed installation/upgrade is typically caused by one of two scenarios:
1. **A Failed CSV:** The CSV is in the FAILED phase.
2. **A Failed InstallPlan:** Usually occurs because a resource listed in the InstallPlan fails to be created or updated. An InstallPlan may fail independently of its CSV and may fail to create the CSV.

> By opting into "failed forward" upgrades, OLM will allow you to recover from failed installations and upgrades by:

Reviewer: We mention opting into this functionality but don't document until header closer to the end of this documentation. Should we at least link to that header, or do we need to restructure this?

OLM's Resolver is deterministic, meaning that the set of installables will not change for a given set of arguments if no new upgrades have been declared in the existing CatalogSources. When an upgrade fails due to a CSV entering the FAILED phase, the CSV being replaced still exists and is not referenced by a subscription. Today, OLM would send both `Operator v1` and `Operator v2` to the resolver which will normally be unsatisfiable because `Operator v1` is marked as required and `Operator v2` cannot be upgraded further since it provides the same APIs as `Operator v1`. In order to support "failing forward", OLM needs to omit CSVs in the REPLACING phase from the set of arguments sent to the resolver when "fail forward" upgrades are enabled.

### When an InstallPlan failed

Let's review what steps must be taken to recover from a failed InstallPlan today:
1. `Operator v1` is being upgraded to `Operator v2`.
2. The InstallPlan for `Operator v2` fails.
3. `Operator v3` is added to the catalog and is defined as the upgrade for `Operator v1`.
4. The user deletes the InstallPlan created for `Operator v2`.

> 5. A new InstallPlan is generated for `Operator v3` and the upgrade succeeds.

Reviewer: We may need to switch out the numerical bullet pointing with `-` to make it consistent with the rest of this markdown file. I was looking at the deploy preview and the bullet points weren't rendering there.

Author: Yeah, that's super weird. I tried a couple of things that other Docsy/Hugo sites have done and they weren't working. Also our entire docsite does not have a single numbered list so something must be going on there. 

Regardless, I switched these too `-`'s

With "fail forward" upgrades, OLM allows new InstallPlans to be generated if:
- The failed installPlan is referenced by a subscription in the namespace.
- The catalogSource has been updated to include a new upgrade for the set of arguments.

In practice, the fourth step from the previous workflow would be removed, meaning that the you simply need to update the CatalogSource and wait for the cluster to move past the failed install.

To further understand, let's visualize this.

{{<mermaid>}}
graph TD;
    A(Operavtor V1 installed) --> B(Starts upgrading to Operator V2)

    B --> |Install succeeds| F(Operator V2 is installed and succeeds)

    B --> |InstallPlan fails| C(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
    C --> |Upgrade blocked as V1 is in solution set still| D(Manually delete Operator V2 InstallPlan)
    D --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| E(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)

    B --> |InstallPlan fails with fail forward upgrades| H(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
    H --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| J(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)
{{</mermaid>}}

> >BEST PRACTICE NOTE: If a bundle is known to fail, it should be skipped in the upgrade graph using the [skips](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/operator-catalog/creating-an-update-graph/#skips) or [skipRange](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/operator-catalog/creating-an-update-graph/#skiprange) feature.

Reviewer: Do we need to surface this best practice note further up?

### When one or more CSVs have failed

Let's review what steps must be taken to recover from a failed CSV today:
1. `Operator v1` is being upgraded to `Operator v2`.
2. The CSV for `Operator v2` enters the FAILED phase.
3. `Operator v3` is added to the catalog which replaces or skips `Operator v2`.
3. The resolver cannot upgrade `Operator v2` while including `Operator v1` in the solution set, upgrade is blocked.
4. User manually deletes the existing CSVs, a new InstallPlan is generated and approved.

> 5. `Operator v3` is installed and the upgrade succeeds.

Reviewer: Same thing above: these aren't rendering in the deploy preview.

- Allows CSVs to move from the FAILED phase to the REPLACING phase.

These changes allow OLM to recover from any number of failed CSVs in an upgrade path. You only need to update the CatalogSource with new operators that replace the FAILED CSVs. 

## Opting into Fail Forward Upgrades

Since resolution is namespaced, the toggle for allowing "fail forward" upgrades is namespaced as well to avoid having extra burden on the resolver. This removes complexity surrounding the resolver's understanding of which dependent operators can or cannot use the forced upgrade toggle.

With this in mind, the namespaced resource, OperatorGroup, has the `upgradeStrategy` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
kind: OperatorGroup
exdx marked this conversation as resolved.
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: bar
spec:
  upgradeStrategy:
     # Possible values include "Default" or "UnsafeFailForward".
    name: UnsafeFailForward
```

With the upgradeStrategy type set to `UnsafeFailForward`, OLM will allow operators to "fail forward" in adherence with the principles discussed below. If the upgradeStrategy is unset or set to `Default` OLM will exhibit existing behavior. 

> ### __**Warning**__

Reviewer: Any idea on whether we should be documenting something like this much further up in the file?

Author: Yeah, definitely. Raised it to the top.

---
title: "Opting into fail forward upgrades"
linkTitle: "Opting into fail forward upgrades"
weight: 4
description: >
  Fail forward upgrades is a feature that allows for the automatic upgrade of failed installs and upgrades. 
  It is ultimately unsafe and should only be used in specific circumstances. 
---

## Warning

> Enabling fail forward upgrades may have severe consequences and recovery from these consequences is not guaranteed. Critical versions of operators may fail to install and can thus lead to unknown behavior and potentially data loss. As a result, using this features is not recommended in the majority of circumstances. Only use this feature if you:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature is not recommended in a majority of cases as enabling fail forward upgrades no longer guarantees sane upgrade paths, possibly causing unrecoverable failures resulting in dataloss. Only use this feature if you:
```

> - Have complete control over operator installs, including OLM.
> - Do not want to manually upgrade your failed operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Know every operator installed in the namespace.
- Have deep knowledge regarding the upgrade paths for each operator in the namespace.
- Have control over the contents of the catalogs providing the operators in the namespace.
- Do not want to manually upgrade your failed operators.
```

## What "Fail Forward" upgrades add
A failed installation/upgrade is typically caused by one of two scenarios:

> - **A Failed CSV:** The CSV is in the FAILED phase.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to define CSV here?

Author: How about a little introduction and then a link to the documentation for it?

https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/clusterserviceversion/#docsconcepts

metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: bar
spec:
  upgradeStrategy:
     # Possible values include "Default" or "TechPreviewUnsafeFailForward".
    name: TechPreviewUnsafeFailForward
```

With the upgradeStrategy type set to `TechPreviewUnsafeFailForward`, OLM will allow operators to "fail forward" in adherence with the principles discussed below. If the upgradeStrategy is unset or set to `Default` OLM will exhibit existing behavior.

## Understanding "Fail Forward" upgrades

Before using fail forward upgrades, it is important to understand how OLM and the Resolver calculate what needs to be installed. When determining what to install, OLM provides the resolver with the set of CSVs in a namespace. The resolver treats these CSVs differently depending on whether or not they are claimed by a Subscription, where the Subscription lists the CSV's name in its `.status.currentCSV` field.
- If a CSV is claimed by a Subscription, the resolver will allow it to be upgraded by a bundle that replaces it.
- If a CSV is not claimed by a Subscription, it is assumed that the user installed the CSV themselves, that OLM should not upgrade the CSV, and that it must appear in the next set of installables.

> OLM's Resolver is deterministic, meaning that the set of installables will not change for a given set of arguments if no new upgrades have been declared in the existing CatalogSources. When an upgrade fails due to a CSV entering the FAILED phase, the CSV being replaced still exists and is not referenced by a subscription. Today, OLM would send both `Operator v1` and `Operator v2` to the resolver which will normally be unsatisfiable because `Operator v1` is marked as required and `Operator v2` cannot be upgraded further since it provides the same APIs as `Operator v1`. In order to support "failing forward", OLM needs to omit CSVs in the REPLACING phase from the set of arguments sent to the resolver when "fail forward" upgrades are enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OLM's Resolver is deterministic, meaning that the set of installables will not change for a given set of arguments if no new upgrades have been declared in the existing CatalogSources. When an upgrade fails due to a CSV entering the FAILED phase, the CSV being replaced still exists and is not referenced by a subscription. Today, OLM would send both `Operator v1` and `Operator v2` to the resolver which will normally be unsatisfiable because `Operator v1` is marked as required and `Operator v2` cannot be upgraded further since it provides the same APIs as `Operator v1`. In order to support "failing forward", OLM needs to omit CSVs in the REPLACING phase from the set of arguments sent to the resolver when `UnsafeFailForward` upgrades are enabled.
```

Reviewer 2: It may make sense to rename this to `Unsafe Fail Forward` in all instances. "Fail forwards" describes the behavior better, but Unsafe Fail Forwards suggests that this feature is dangerous and is the actual name of the upgrade strategy. I think we can omit the `TechPreview` prefix as it will hopefully be removed at some date.

Reviewer 2: I'm not married to this so I encourage you to object if you disagree.

Author: I agree with you on this and updated everything surrounding this.

- The resolver cannot upgrade `Operator v2` while including `Operator v1` in the solution set, upgrade is blocked.
- User manually deletes the existing CSVs, a new InstallPlan is generated and approved.
- `Operator v3` is installed and the upgrade succeeds.

To further understand, let's visualize this.

{{<mermaid>}}
graph TD;
  A(Operator V1 installed) --> B(Starts upgrading to Operator V2)

  B --> |Install succeeds| F(Operator V2 is installed and succeeds)

  B --> |CSV enters FAILED phase| C(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
  C --> |Upgrade blocked as V1 is in solution set still| D(Manually delete Operator V2 CSV)
  D --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| E(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)

  B --> |CSV enters FAILED phase with fail forward upgrades| H(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
  H --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| J(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)
{{</mermaid>}}

When you opt into "fail forward" upgrades, OLM:
- Does not include CSVs in the REPLACING phase in the set of arguments sent to the Resolver.
- Allows CSVs to move from the FAILED phase to the REPLACING phase.

> These changes allow OLM to recover from any number of failed CSVs in an upgrade path. You only need to update the CatalogSource with new operators that replace the FAILED CSVs. With catalog polling enabled, you can even skip this step by pushing a new catalog image to the same tag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes allow OLM to recover from any number of failed CSVs in an upgrade path. You only need to update the CatalogSource with new operators that replace the latest FAILED CSV. With catalog polling enabled, you can even skip this step by pushing a new catalog image to the same tag.
```

---
title: "Opting into fail forward upgrades"
linkTitle: "Opting into fail forward upgrades"
weight: 4
description: >
  Fail forward upgrades is a feature that allows for the automatic upgrade of failed installs and upgrades. 
  It is ultimately unsafe and should only be used in specific circumstances. 
---

## Warning

> Enabling fail forward upgrades may have severe consequences and recovery from these consequences is not guaranteed. Critical versions of operators may not be installed and can thus lead to unknown behavior and potentially data loss. As a result, using this features is not recommended in the majority of circumstances. Only use this feature if:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enabling fail forward upgrades may have severe consequences and recovery from these consequences is not guaranteed. Critical versions of operators may fail to install and can thus lead to unknown behavior and potentially data loss. As a result, using this features is not recommended in the majority of circumstances. Only use this feature if:
```

Reviewer 3: just a suggestion

- You have complete control over operator installs, including OLM.

> - Do not want to manually upgrade your failed operators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You do not want to manually upgrade your failed operators.
```

Reviewer 3: Or, move the "You"s behind the ':'. i.e. `Only use this feature if you:`

Author: Ah, good point!

## What "Fail Forward" upgrades add
A failed installation/upgrade is typically caused by one of two scenarios:

- **A Failed CSV:** The CSV is in the FAILED phase.
- **A Failed InstallPlan:** Usually occurs because a resource listed in the InstallPlan fails to be created or updated. An InstallPlan may fail independently of its CSV and may fail to create the CSV.

By opting into "failed forward" upgrades, OLM will allow you to recover from failed installations and upgrades by:
- Allowing CSVs to move from the FAILED phase to the REPLACING phase when "fail forward" upgrades are enabled.
- Allowing OLM to calculate new installPlans for a set of installables if:
  - The InstallPlan referenced by a subscription is in the FAILED phase.
  - The CatalogSource has been updated to include a new upgrade for one or more CSVs in the namespace.

## Using Fail Forward Upgrades

> Since resolution is namespaced, the toggle for allowing "fail forward" upgrades is namespaced as well to avoid having extra burden on the resolver. This removes complexity surrounding the resolver's understanding of which dependent operators can or cannot use the forced upgrade toggle.

Reviewer 4: nit: resolution is namespace-scoped

> Since resolution is namespaced, the toggle for allowing "fail forward" upgrades is namespaced as well to avoid having extra burden on the resolver. This removes complexity surrounding the resolver's understanding of which dependent operators can or cannot use the forced upgrade toggle.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure in user-facing documentation we should mention things like "to avoid having extra burden on the resolver" since it's essentially an implementation detail and not something the end user needs to know. It's fair to mention that namespace-scoped resolution is a characteristic of resolution in OLM and therefore all operators in the namespace opt-in to the FailForward strategy if it's set.

Author: This is a good callout. I think for now we can remove most of this blurb that mentions the resolver and just let the user know that this is namespace scoped since resolution is namespace scoped.

With this in mind, the namespaced resource, OperatorGroup, has the `upgradeStrategy` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
kind: OperatorGroup
metadata:
  name: foo
  namespace: bar
spec:
  upgradeStrategy:
     # Possible values include "Default" or "UnsafeFailForward".

>     name: UnsafeFailForward

Reviewer 4: nit: needs to be updated to `TechPreviewUnsafeFailForward`

```

> With the upgradeStrategy type set to `UnsafeFailForward`, OLM will allow operators to "fail forward" in adherence with the principles discussed below. If the upgradeStrategy is unset or set to `Default` OLM will exhibit existing behavior.

Reviewer 4: nit: update to `TechPreviewUnsafeFailForward`

## Understanding "Fail Forward" upgrades

Before using fail forward upgrades, it is important to understand how OLM and the Resolver calculate what needs to be installed. When determining what to install, OLM provides the resolver with the set of CSVs in a namespace. The resolver treats these CSVs differently depending on whether or not they are claimed by a Subscription, where the Subscription lists the CSV's name in its `.status.currentCSV` field.
- If a CSV is claimed by a Subscription, the resolver will allow it to be upgraded by a bundle that replaces it.
- If a CSV is not claimed by a Subscription, it is assumed that the user installed the CSV themselves, that OLM should not upgrade the CSV, and that it must appear in the next set of installables.

> OLM's Resolver is deterministic, meaning that the set of installables will not change for a given set of arguments if no new upgrades have been declared in the existing CatalogSources. When an upgrade fails due to a CSV entering the FAILED phase, the CSV being replaced still exists and is not referenced by a subscription. Today, OLM would send both `Operator v1` and `Operator v2` to the resolver which will normally be unsatisfiable because `Operator v1` is marked as required and `Operator v2` cannot be upgraded further since it provides the same APIs as `Operator v1`. In order to support "failing forward", OLM needs to omit CSVs in the REPLACING phase from the set of arguments sent to the resolver when "fail forward" upgrades are enabled.

Reviewer 4: This resolver documentation is really great. I'm wondering if we aren't going to deep into the weeds here (since really only the OLM team knows about the resolver, and even there the knowledge is limited -- let alone our users) but I think it's definitely helpful for documenting this feature. 

As a potential follow-up, we can introduce stand-alone documentation about the resolver and link to it from here. I'm not sure any exists today.

Author: That's a really good point and would make a lot of sense with the upcoming breakout of the resolver.

- The resolver cannot upgrade `Operator v2` while including `Operator v1` in the solution set, upgrade is blocked.
- User manually deletes the existing CSVs, a new InstallPlan is generated and approved.
- `Operator v3` is installed and the upgrade succeeds.

To further understand, let's visualize this.

{{<mermaid>}}
graph TD;
  A(Operator V1 installed) --> B(Starts upgrading to Operator V2)

  B --> |Install succeeds| F(Operator V2 is installed and succeeds)

  B --> |CSV enters FAILED phase| C(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
  C --> |Upgrade blocked as V1 is in solution set still| D(Manually delete Operator V2 CSV)
  D --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| E(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)

  B --> |CSV enters FAILED phase with fail forward upgrades| H(Operator V3 added to catalog replacing V2)
  H --> |New InstallPlan generated and approved| J(Operator V3 is installed and succeeds)
{{</mermaid>}}

When you opt into "fail forward" upgrades, OLM:
- Does not include CSVs in the REPLACING phase in the set of arguments sent to the Resolver.
- Allows CSVs to move from the FAILED phase to the REPLACING phase.

> These changes allow OLM to recover from any number of failed CSVs in an upgrade path. You only need to update the CatalogSource with new operators that replace the FAILED CSVs. 

Reviewer 4: Maybe worth mentioning that with catalog polling enabled, they won't even have to change the catalog on-cluster but simply push the new image to the same tag?

Author: Completely agree. How's this read to you:

> These changes allow OLM to recover from any number of failed CSVs in an upgrade path. You only need to update the CatalogSource with new operators that replace the FAILED CSVs. With catalog polling enabled, you can even skip this step by pushing a new catalog image to the same tag.

Reviewer 4: Sounds good 👍

---
title: "Fail forward upgrades"
linkTitle: "Fail forward upgrades"
weight: 4
description: >
    Fail forward upgrades
---

## What "Fail Forward" upgrades add
A failed installation/upgrade is typically caused by one of two scenarios:
1. **A Failed CSV:** The CSV is in the FAILED phase.
2. **A Failed InstallPlan:** Usually occurs because a resource listed in the InstallPlan fails to be created or updated. An InstallPlan may fail independently of its CSV and may fail to create the CSV.

> By enabling "failed forward" upgrades, OLM will allow you to recover from failed installations and upgrades by:

Reviewer 5: Isn't "enabling" and "opting into" the same action, or are there two steps?  This sounds very similar

Author: They're the same thing. Are you thinking I should just change this to "opting into"?

Author: They're the same thing, I think it makes sense to git rid of the first bullet to your point.

OLM's Resolver is deterministic, meaning that the set of installables will not change for a given set of arguments if no new upgrades have been declared in the existing CatalogSources. When an upgrade fails due to a CSV entering the FAILED phase, the CSV being replaced still exists and is not referenced by a subscription. Today, OLM would send both `Operator v1` and `Operator v2` to the resolver which will normally be unsatisfiable because `Operator v1` is marked as required and `Operator v2` cannot be upgraded further since it provides the same APIs as `Operator v1`. In order to support "failing forward", OLM needs to omit CSVs in the REPLACING phase from the set of arguments sent to the resolver when "fail forward" upgrades are enabled.

### When an InstallPlan failed

Let's review what steps must be taken to recover from a failed InstallPlan today:
1. `Operator v1` is being upgraded to `Operator v2`.
2. The InstallPlan for `Operator v2` fails.
3. `Operator v3` is added to the catalog and is defined as the upgrade for `Operator v1`.
4. The user deletes the InstallPlan created for `Operator v2`.
5. A new InstallPlan is generated for `Operator v3` and the upgrade succeeds.

> When you opt into "fail forward" upgrades, OLM allows new InstallPlans to be generated if:

Reviewer 5: Unless the intent is to restate the 'opt in' nature of these plans, maybe better to state as something like:
"With 'fail forward' upgrades enables, OLM allows ..."

Author: Yeah totally, I agree with that.

- The catalogSource has been updated to include a new upgrade for the set of arguments.

In practice, the fourth step from the previous workflow would be removed, meaning that the you simply need to update the CatalogSource and wait for the cluster to move past the failed install.

>BEST PRACTICE NOTE: If a bundle is known to fail, it should be skipped in the upgrade graph using the [skips](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/operator-catalog/creating-an-update-graph/#skips) or [skipRange](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/operator-catalog/creating-an-update-graph/#skiprange) feature.

### When one or more CSVs have failed

Let's review what steps must be taken to recover from a failed CSV today:
1. `Operator v1` is being upgraded to `Operator v2`.
2. The CSV for `Operator v2` enters the FAILED phase.
3. `Operator v3` is added to the catalog which replaces or skips `Operator v2`.
3. The resolver cannot upgrade `Operator v2` while including `Operator v1` in the solution set, upgrade is blocked.
4. User manually deletes the existing CSVs, a new InstallPlan is generated and approved.

> 5. `Operator v3` is installed and the upgrade succeeds.

Reviewer 5: Would this benefit from a mermaid node graph?

Author: It's funny I said the same thing on the EP lol. Yes, it definitely would, I'll get on adding that.

Reviewer 5: https://learn.netlify.app/en/shortcodes/mermaid/ ?

Author: Alright, I added some mermaid graphs. Thoughts?
